docs: osd replacement user guide (#17954)
rook/rook: Documentation/Storage-Configuration/Advanced/ceph-osd-mgmt.md

## Replace an OSD

> This procedure replaces a failed disk while the OSD keeps its original ID and its place in the CRUSH map, following [Ceph's OSD replacement procedure](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/rados/operations/add-or-rm-osds/#replacing-an-osd), so Ceph backfills only the data that was on the failed disk rather than rebalancing the whole cluster. The replacement is triggered by an annotation on the OSD deployment.

Reviewer: Linking to the Ceph replacement procedure seems confusing since Rook's process is different from core ceph, I'd suggest not to link it.
```suggestion
This procedure replaces a failed disk while the OSD keeps its original ID and its place in the CRUSH map, so Ceph backfills only the data that was on the failed disk rather than rebalancing the whole cluster. The replacement is triggered by an annotation on the OSD deployment.
```

!!! note
    This applies to **host-based clusters** only. To replace a disk backing a PVC-based OSD, follow [Remove an OSD](#remove-an-osd) instead and let the operator re-create it.

### How it works

The replacement runs in five stages, alternating between what you do and what Rook does:

1. You annotate the OSD deployment with `osd.rook.io/replace` to trigger the replacement.
2. Rook marks the OSD `out` and waits until Ceph reports it safe to destroy.
3. Rook destroys the OSD and annotates the deployment `osd.rook.io/replace-ready-for-swap`.
4. You physically swap the failed disk.

> 5. Rook detects the new disk and provisions it into the same OSD ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Rook detects the new disk and provisions the replacement OSD with the same OSD ID.
```

**Device selection.** After the swap, Rook provisions the new disk only if it matches the device selection in your CephCluster CR (see [Storage Selection Settings](../../CRDs/Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#storage-selection-settings)):

- **Matched automatically:** `useAllDevices: true`, a `deviceFilter` that matches by kernel name, or a `/dev/disk/by-path/...` reference when the new disk is in the same physical slot.
- **Needs a CR update:** a `/dev/disk/by-id/...` or `/dev/disk/by-uuid/...` reference, an explicit device name, or a `by-path` reference when the disk moves to a different slot. These identify the old disk, so edit the CephCluster CR to point at the new one.

**Supported layouts:** all types of OSDs for host-based cluster including shared-metadata OSDs.

!!! warning
    This procedure replaces a single **data** disk. It does not replace a **metadata device** shared by several OSDs. If the disk that failed is the shared metadata device, this procedure does not apply.

### Step 1: Trigger the replacement

> Annotate the OSD's deployment. Replace `5` with your OSD's ID (the number in the `rook-ceph-osd-<ID>` deployment name). The ID in the annotation value must match the OSD ID: this guards against destroying the wrong OSD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**In the following example, OSD with ID 5 is being replaced. Make sure to replace `5` with your OSD ID.**

First, annotate the OSD's deployment for replacement. The ID in the annotation value must match the OSD ID: this guards against destroying the wrong OSD.
```

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph annotate deployment rook-ceph-osd-5 \
  osd.rook.io/replace=yes-really-replace-osd-5
```

> The OSD does not have to have failed. You can replace a healthy OSD the same way, for example to move it to new hardware; Rook drains it before destroying it, so no data becomes unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OSD does not have to have failed. You can replace a healthy OSD the same way, for example to move it to new hardware; Rook drains it before destroying it, so no data is at risk of loss.
```

### Step 2: Wait until the disk is ready to swap

Rook validates the request, then drains and destroys the OSD. When the OSD is destroyed and the disk is safe to pull, Rook adds the `osd.rook.io/replace-ready-for-swap` annotation. Watch for it:

> 

Reviewer: Since the wait may take some time, how about a ceph command to show data movement progress? For example, `ceph osd df` would show how much data is still held by the OSD.

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph get deployment rook-ceph-osd-5 \
  -o jsonpath='{.metadata.annotations.osd\.rook\.io/replace-ready-for-swap}{"\n"}'
# prints "true" once the disk is safe to pull
```

If the annotation does not appear, either the request failed validation and the replacement never started, or the OSD is still draining (a large OSD can take hours or days, and there is no timeout). Check the operator's warning and error logs for a rejected request:

```console
kubectl -n rook-ceph logs deploy/rook-ceph-operator | grep -i "replacement"
```

### Step 3: Swap the disk

> !!! warning

Reviewer: A warning implies something will break, but creating a new OSD instead of replacing does not seem severe?
```suggestion
!!! important
```

    Pull the disk only **after** the `osd.rook.io/replace-ready-for-swap` annotation appears. Until the swap, the failed disk still carries its Ceph signature, which is both what reserves the OSD ID for the new disk and how Rook detects the swap. Swapping before the annotation appears causes the new disk to be provisioned as a brand-new OSD with a **different** ID.

Physically remove the failed disk and insert the replacement. You can do this at any time after the annotation appears, minutes or days later. The new disk must go into the **same host**. It does not have to be the same physical slot unless you select devices by a stable path (see [Before you begin](#before-you-begin)).

### Step 4: Verify the replacement completed

> Rook detects the new disk on its next reconcile and brings the OSD back up with its original ID `5`, reusing the surviving DB volume for a shared-metadata OSD. If the discovery daemon is disabled, Rook will not notice the new disk on its own; trigger a reconcile, for example by restarting the operator pod, so you do not wait indefinitely. Confirm the deployment is back and running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rook detects the new disk on its next reconcile and brings the OSD back up with its original ID `5`, reusing the surviving DB volume for a shared-metadata OSD. If the discovery daemon is disabled, Rook will not notice the new disk on its own. Instead trigger a reconcile by restarting the operator pod, so you do not wait indefinitely. 

Confirm the deployment is back and running:
```

## Replace an OSD

This procedure replaces a failed disk while the OSD keeps its original ID and its place in the CRUSH map, so Ceph backfills only the data that was on the failed disk rather than rebalancing the whole cluster. The replacement is triggered by an annotation on the OSD deployment.

!!! note
    This applies to **host-based clusters** only. To replace a disk backing a PVC-based OSD, follow [Remove an OSD](#remove-an-osd) instead and let the operator re-create it.

### How it works

The replacement runs in five stages, alternating between what you do and what Rook does:

1. You annotate the OSD deployment with `osd.rook.io/replace` to trigger the replacement.
2. Rook marks the OSD `out` and waits until Ceph reports it safe to destroy.
3. Rook destroys the OSD and annotates the deployment `osd.rook.io/replace-ready-for-swap`.
4. You physically swap the failed disk.
5. Rook detects the new disk and provisions the replacement OSD with the same OSD ID.

### Before you begin

**Cluster settings.** The feature needs the OSD health check enabled and automatic OSD removal disabled in the CephCluster CR. Both are the defaults, so check them only if you have changed them:

> - `spec.healthCheck.daemonHealth.osd.disabled: false`

Reviewer: The intent is to show the required settings, right?
```suggestion
- `spec.healthCheck.daemonHealth.osd.disabled: true`
```
